# Interim Status Report: College Characteristics and Graduate Earnings
## Progress on the Tasks Described in the Project Plan
As of April 14, 2026, we have completed the initial stages of the project. Using our Project Plan and the project instructions document for guidance, we have been able to stay on track. We have successfully performed data acquisition on the two datasets we chose to use for the project. Both the College Scorecard and IPEDS datasets are public domain under the U.S. government, so we had no issues complying with licenses and terms of use. Although the datasets could have been acquired via a simple CSV download, we wanted to diversify our acquisition methods to apply what we learned in IS 477 lectures. For the College Scorecard dataset, we fetched the data using an API request. In order to do this, we needed to get an API key. For the IPEDS dataset, we downloaded the CSV. We made sure to generate SHA-256 checksums for each of the datasets to ensure data integrity.

After we acquired the data, we conducted a data quality analysis and documented our observations. This helped us identify what to focus on during data cleaning. We first started by identifying if there were any missing values in either of the datasets. The IPEDS dataset did not have any missing values in any of its columns, but the College Scorecard had plenty of missing data in every column except for ID and School Name. Given that our research question is about looking into the correlation between tuition costs and post-graduation earnings, we can't really use universities that are missing values for these columns. Thus, we opted to remove these columns from the dataframe. This left us with 1,905 colleges and universities to observe. We decided to look further into some outliers as well. We noticed a few colleges that had very little students enrolled, some as little as 2 students. Given how small of a sample size that is, we decided that information from colleges with less than 50 students at the very least may not be representative of the overall population. Thus, we decided to remove those 7 observations as well.

This leaves us with 1,897 observations. Compared to the original dataset which had 6,322 observations, the dataset has shrunk considerably. The average student size has decreases substantially with a few outliers being removed due to having missing information while the standard deviation has increased slightly, as expected with a reduction in observations. Overall, we reasonably believe this dataset to be representative of our population of interest, but recognize the potential flaws that come with removing many observations.

That concludes the data analysis & cleaning completed so far. In order to prepare the datasets to be combined, we would typically have to clean the ID, however they are formatted the exact same between our two datasets, meaning nothing has to be done in that regard.

## Updated Timeline
The approximate timeline for the project is as follows:
+ [__April 4th - 5th__]: **Data Acquisition**, completion of acquiring the data with ethical and storage constraints in mind. Will be completed by Vicky. ✔️
+ [__April 11th - 12th__]: **Data Analysis & Cleaning**, using Python/Pandas to clean the data, we will conduct an initial data analysis, documenting the quality of the data and cleaning any missing data to make it ready for investigation. Will be completed by Alex. ✔️
+ [__April 18th - 26th__]: **Data Investigation**, we will integrate the data using one of the methods discussed in class, and then work with the data to solve our question while utilizing automated workflows to do so. Will be completed by Vicky.
+ [__April 28th - 30th__]: **Documentation**, preparing documentation for how we completed the project, ensuring reproducibility and adherence to FAIR principles. Will be completed by Alex.
+ [__May 1st - 2nd__]: **Final Submission**, prepare to submit prior to deadline. Will be completed by both Alex & Vicky.
## Changes Made to the Project Plan
One change we made to the Project Plan was within the timeline. We underestimated how long it would take us to complete each task, so we've adjusted the timeline to better reflect how long we'll spend on each. Another change we made was shifting some of the responsibilities and tasks assigned to each team member. Vicky expressed interest in taking over the data acquisition part of the project while Alex wanted to do more of the data analysis, so we reassigned the roles slightly.

We also have changed our plan to address learning new concepts. For example, in original plan, we intended on having the dataset combined using SQL, but after learning about other methods to link data such as record linkage, we are looking into other ways to best integrate our datasets with one another, which will complete next in our timeline.

## Challenges or Problems Encountered
One challenge that we've ran into so far is related to storage. When we initially acquired the data, we realized that the file sizes for both the College Scorecard and IPEDS datasets were very large. Together, they took up 1.55 GB. This exceeds the Github file size limit of 50 MB and also resulted in low storage warnings on our laptops. We viewed the CSV files to find the root of the problem and noticed that it was due to an excessive number of columns, many of which we did not even need to answer our research questions. To address the storage challenge, we decided the best course of action would be to revise the data acquisition script so that we extract only the columns relevant to our project from the College Scorecard and IPEDS datasets. The fix made a substantial difference. It solved the problem as the file sizes went from a combined 1.55 GB down to 698 KB.

Another challenge was debating what to do with the missing data. When we retrieved the scorecard data, we didn't anticipate a majority of the records to have missing information. We considered options like imputation, in which we would impute the mean or median of the original scorecard data for every piece of data missing either the tuition cost or postgraduate earnings (or both). However, we decided that might be inaccurate and impact the legitimacy of our conclusions. Thus, we decided the sample size after cleaning was large enough to still be representative and accepted the potential risks that might come along with a smaller sample size.

## Team Members Contribution Summary
Vicky Wu: I acquired the data for this project. First, I familiarized myself with the characteristics and naming conventions of the College Scorecard and IPEDS datasets using the documentation available on the respective source websites. Then, I wrote a Python script on Visual Studio Code for data acquisition, making sure I included the calculation of checksums for data integrity and labeling the steps with comments. The script was able to successfully create the raw data files `ipeds_hd2024.csv` and `scorecard_raw.csv`. I pushed these changes to Github, and the files are available under `data/raw`.

Alex Cai: I cleaned the data for this project. Using what Vicky acquired, I used VS Code and Python to explore the data and then look further into missing values and outliers that may impact our ability to make conclusions. I cleaned the scorecard dataframe and created the `scorecard_cleaned.csv` file.
